TOTAL SO FAR: 1

PENDING: .75 for unicode, 4 for check-error. 
Ask about tokens string for other .3. 

TODO:
- ANF. Have to. 
- Denser and Densest Cons cells
- Tail rec opt. 

MODULE 1: SVM

Depth (20 points), implementation: Add bignums to the SVM, and change the UFT 
so that bignums are the default numeric type. These points can be claimed any 
time before classes end

Depth (up to 5 points), tools: You use ChatGPT and/or Copilot to write some of 
your code, and you demonstrate your understanding of what the tool did well and 
how to prompt it effectively. 1 point per module up to a maximum of 5. 
These points can be claimed any time before classes end

MODULE 2: LOADER

Operational semantics [0.25 points]. You can write down a rule of operational 
semantics to specify what the loader does with the <module> form.

Operational semantics [1 point]. The vScheme global environment 
ρ is meant to be represented by a compositional mapping from names to locations: 
ρ = G ∘ N. 
And in vScheme, the initial basis ρ0 is a total function: every named variable 
has a location. But in the virtual machine, G is a partial function: 
only finitely many global variables have designated locations in the VM. 
This discrepancy can be resolved by writing suitable operational semantics, 
and you can show two different ways to do it (half a point each, 
partial credit OK).

Tokenization and parsing [0.5 points]. Suppose that we want to change the 
on-disk representation of object code so that instead of a sequence of
 integer codes, a literal string is represented as a C-style string literal, 
 with double quotes. To handle the new representation, what has to change in 
 the interface described in file <tokens.h>?

Dynamic compilation and loading [2 points]. μScheme and vScheme both have a use 
syntactic form, which tells the interpreter to load and run code. This goal is 
to implement two machine instructions, one to call popen and read from a pipe, 
and one to load a list of modules from an open file descriptor. 
These two instructions can then eventually be used to call the compiler and 
load the results. These instructions can be tested now, and then by the time of 
module 4, they can be used to implement a use function.

MODULE 3: NONE LEFT

MODULE 4: NONE LEFT 

MODULE 5: KNF

Let-floating transformation [1 point]. 
When variable y is chosen so it is the same as x or not 
free in e₃, the following expressions are equivalent:

let x = (let y = e₁ in e₂) in e₃

let y = e₁ in (let x = e₂ in e₃)
But the second expression results in code that is easier to read and that runs 
faster on some platforms (Peyton Jones, Partain, and Santos 1996). 
Implement let-floating on K-normal form. See what sort of difference it makes 
to the generated VM code.


ROGER:

I thought about doing this in knproject. But then we don't get to 
reap the benefits in knormalize. So I did it knproject, and got the other 
depth points. 

I'm going to do this in knrename.sml. That way, we get the benefits in both 
ANF if we get to it and in the generated code, whether we're coming from 
knf off of disk or k-normalized code. 


Prettyprinting [2 points]. The indentation and line breaks for the 
vScheme prettyprinter are just barely tolerable. Improve them.

MODULE 6: CODEGEN 

Invariants and preconditions [1 point]. You have written an ML function that 
checks the precondition in outcome 5, thereby confirming that it is OK to 
translate let into assignment. Your forEffect function checks the condition 
before calling forEffect'.

Intraprocedural control operators [2 points]. You add break and continue to 
K-normal form and to everything upstream of it, and you translate them into 
goto instructions. (The vScheme parser already has hooks for break and 
continue; you just need to add the abstract syntax.)

A-normal form [3 points]. A-normal form (Flanagan et al 13) is like K-normal 
form, but with more restrictions: in an expression of the form let x = e in e', 
expression e may not be a let, if, or while form. Define a variant of A-normal 
form suitable for the UFT, generate code from it, and in a future module,
convert first-order Scheme to it (either directly from first-order Scheme or
indirectly from K-normal form).

MODULE 7: FUNCTIONS 

Stack trace [3 points]. When a run-time error occurs, your code produces a stack
trace. To make the stack trace useful, you extend the representation of FUNCODE
to include a string that encodes the function’s name (if known) and source-code
location (if known). The extension is supported by your K-normal form, assembly
code (including parser), object code, SVM loader, and vmrun.

This work may count toward depth points or toward module 12, but not both.

Error checking and recovery [4 points]. You implement a check-error instruction,
which works by putting a special frame on the call stack. If that frame is
returned to by normal execution, the check-error test fails. But if an error
occurs while that frame is on the stack, the test succeeds.

This work may count toward depth points or toward module 12, but not both.

Code improvements for tail calls, part I: Register targeting. [3 points] You
define an optimization pass for K-normal form which changes the register
bindings so that every tail call is made to a function in register 0 with
arguments in registers 1 to N . This is done not by adding new bindings (which
the VM can to more efficiently) but by changing the registers used in existing
bindings. Such a renaming is always possible, and the cost can be limited to at
most a single new VM instruction.

In native code, this optimization is important. In a VM, its payoff is small.
But it enables the next optimization, which has high payoff in both settings.

This work may count toward depth points or toward module 12, but not both.

Code improvements for tail calls, part II: Optimized tail recursion [2 points].
Building on the previous step, your UFT recognizes when a tail call is a
recursive call, and it optimizes that tail call into a goto instruction. (A good
heuristic for recognizing that a tail call is recursive is that it calls a
function in register 0.)

This optimization is essential for functional languages: a tail-recursive
function is optimized into a loop.

This work may count toward depth points or toward module 12, but not both.

Curried functions [5 points]. You implement automatic currying as described in
the handout on understanding procedure calls.

The strategy I recommend is called “eval/apply” and is described by Simon Marlow
and Simon Peyton Jones in a landmark 2006 paper. The paper has way more detail
than you need, but the important bits will involve what new species of value and
what new species of activation record are useful for implementing curried
functions.

This work may count toward depth points or toward module 12, but not both.

Exceptions [5 points]. Implement exceptions and exception handlers. I recommend
defining two VM instructions that resemble the “long label” and “long goto”
features from chapter 3 of my book, which I can give you. Then build exceptions
on top of that.

This work may count toward depth points or toward module 12, but not both.

Coroutines [10 points]. A coroutine is a synchronous, cooperative, lightweight,
concurrent abstraction. It’s like a thread, only simpler. A coroutine is
represented by a suspended VM state. Coroutines need at least the following:

A new form of value whose payload is a VM state.

Instructions that create a coroutine (from a function) and wait for one to
terminate.

Instructions that transfer control between coroutines. These can be symmetric
(as in Icon or asymmetric (as in Lua).

Coroutines are a good first step toward fully preemptive concurrency with
synchronous communication, as in Erlang or Go.

This work may count both toward depth points and module 12. If it is counted
toward both, the depth points will be halved.

MODULE 8: NONE

MODULE 9: K-NORMALIZATION

Let-floating [3 points]. Use the equations of translation (the 𝓡 function) from
module 6 to show when the following two expressions have the same translation:

let y = (let x = e₁ in e₂) in e₃ let x = e₁ in (let y = e₂ in e₃) Hint: it works
when x is not free in e₃ and in one other special case.

Then deploy your insight in your K‑normalizer to rewrite the first form to the
second form. You’ll know you’ve got it right when your uft fo-kn produces no
nested let expressions—my prettyprinter will sugar everything into let*.

Hint: define a so-called “smart constructor” to use in place of K.LET.

More powerful if instructions [3 points]. Extend your SVM to include
two-register if instructions that can compute a Boolean expression and “skip
next if false”, all in a single VM instruction. For example, if r1 < r2.
Similarly, extend your SVM to include a one-register if instruction that uses
the type predicate null? in the condition.4 Extend your K‑normal form and your
K‑normalizer to exploit these instructions. Demonstrate your extensions and
measure how much the extension can shrink your generated VM code.

Small-integer literals [3 points]. Extend your SVM to include instructions in
R2U8 or R2I8 format, so that expressions like x > 0 or n + 1 can be computed
using a single VM instruction. Extend your K‑normalizer to exploit these
instructions. Demonstrate your extensions and measure how much the extension can
shrink your generated VM code.

Optimized let expressions [2 points]. K‑normalize let by defining a hybrid
policy that results in code that is superior to whatever you would get by using
a one-size-fits-all policy in step 23.

Efficient compilation of long list literals [1 point]. Using strict
left-to-right evaluation for long list literals uses a number of registers
proportional to the length of a list. That means, for example, that we can’t
compile a literal list with 15 numbers, because we would run out of registers.
But if the first argument to cons is a literal value, we can change the
evaluation order to compute the second element first. Do so, and confirm that
your UFT can compile a literal list of numbers, no matter how long, using only
two registers.

Polymorphic code generation [1 point]. Assuming you’ve already implemented
A-normal form, define your K-normalizer as a functor so that your K-normalizer
can generate both K-normal form and A-normal form, just by applying the functor
to two different actual parameters.

Bignums in vScheme [2 points]. (Not related to K-normalization.) Repurpose your
SML bignum implementation from CS 105 to work inside the vScheme interpreter.
Add a suitable type of value, and update the arithmetic primitives so they do
mixed arithmetic. (Alter higher-order function arithOp to handle mixed inputs
and to provide a single point of truth about promotion rules.)

Bignums in the SVM [4 points]. (Not related to K-normalization.) Implement
bignum arithmetic in the SVM. You can port one of your implementations to C, or
you can port my array-based implementation from μSmalltalk. Or you can try using
the GNU multiprecision library (gmp).5


MODULE 10: CLOSURE CONVERSION

More accurate mutation analysis [2 points]. Improve my mutability detector so it
is OK if a single function both mutates a variable and allocates a closure—as
long as no mutated variable is captured. Demonstrate with a test case.

Mutable variables on the heap [3 points]. You implement the
Mutability.moveToHeap pass, which migrates every mutated, captured variable into
a mutable reference cell that is allocated on the heap. The pointer to that cell
is not mutated so it can safely be shared among multiple closures. I provide
some hints.

Demonstrate with the random-number generator or the resettable counter from
chapter 2 of my book.

Mutable variables in closures [3 points]. Improve your UFT so that a closure
slot can be mutated, provided a static analysis shows that the slot is the only
location in which the variable is referred to. You’ll need to write the static
analysis as well as update other UFT passes. Demonstrate your results with the
random-number generator from chapter 2 of my book.

Faster recursion for global functions [1 point]. When a recursive function calls
itself, the semantics of vScheme require that it look up its value in the
global-variable table. But in the absence of mutation, it’s safe for it instead
to call itself using register 0. Implement this improvement in your UFT, and
demonstrate it on a long-running recursion. (Try either a very long tail
recursion or an ordinary recursion that makes an exponential number of calls.)

Reduced dependence on global variables [2 points]. To prevent testing code from
being compromised by malicious student code, Will Mairs and I developed a
source-to-source translation we call “bulletproofing.” Bulletproofing transforms
each val and define by introducing a let form that binds every free global
variable with a local name. This transformation guarantees that the resulting
code depends only on the values of the global variables at the time the
definition is evaluated—if the values of those variables are changed afterward,
the code will be unaffected.

Implement the bulletproofing transformation, either as a source-to-source
transformation or as a pass inside your UFT. Using a long-running recursion,
measure the performance improvement.

This transformation is routinely recommend to Lua programmers as a safe and easy
way for them to speed up their code.

MODULE 11: GARBAGE COLLECTION 

Denser cons cells [2 points]. Using a struct VMBlock to represent a cons cell
has its advantages, but the machine word spent on nslots is wasted. Define a new
type of payload that carries just two values, car and cdr, plus GC metadata.
Make your system use that payload for cons cells.

Measure the improvements in heap size and bytes requested.

Densest cons cells [2 points]. The previous depth opportunity reduces the size
of a cons cell from 48 bytes to 40 bytes. But the 8 bytes spend on a forwarding
pointer are used only during garbage collection, and are otherwise wasted.
Moreover, once the cons cell has been forwarded, the car is no longer needed.
Alter the representation of cons cells so that the forwarding pointer and the
car share space. (An anonymous union will be helpful here.) This will reduce the
size of a cons cell to its absolute minimum of two values (32 bytes).

Measure the improvements in heap size and bytes requested.

Large objects [3 points]. Implement a large-object allocator. A large object
should be allocated with malloc, not on a page, and should never be copied. Here
are some tricks:

You can identify a live large object by setting its forwarded pointer to point
to itself.

You can link large objects on a list, much as pages are linked on a list or
interned strings are linked on a list.

After a collection, you can reclaim dead large objects by traversing the list
after the manner of function VMString_drop_dead_strings.

To test your allocator, you’ll want to allocate large objects and let them die.
Try loading large functions into global variables, then set those global
variables to nil, allowing the large functions to die.

Interior pointers [4 points]. Make it possible to keep a function alive (and
copy it to a new location) even if the only reference to the function is an
interior pointer to its instruction stream (of type Instruction *). And also to
correctly forward such interior pointers.

The key operation here is to be able to take a pointer to an arbitrary location
in an instruction stream and somehow to find the function to which that
instruction stream belongs. Perhaps the operation can be implemented via some
clever doctoring of the instruction stream.

This little project might turn out to be more than 4 points worth of work, but
it’s less than 4 points worth of interest, so I’m just going to keep it at 4
points. Nobody loves interior pointers.

Zero fewer registers [2 points]. At each VM call, update a high-water mark that
records the highest-numbered register ever used. At each garbage collection,
zero registers only to the high-water mark, then reset the high-water mark.
Using a memory-intensive benchmark, measure the difference in both run time and
number of hardware instructions executed.

Garbage-collect registers based on liveness analysis [5 points]. Either in the
UFT or the SVM, do a static analysis at each GC safe point to determine which VM
registers are actually live. At GC time, consult the results of the analysis to
know exactly which registers to scan.